---
layout: default 
title: About
---

# Praxis

The Praxis Program is a 2011â€“12 pilot project of the <a
href="http://lib.virginia.edu/scholarslab">Scholars' Lab</a> at the <a
href="http://lib.virginia.edu/">University of Virginia Library</a>.

It&#8217;s a radical re-imagining of the annual teaching and training we offer in
the Scholars' Lab, and is is meant to complement our work with <a
href="http://www2.lib.virginia.edu/scholarslab/about/fellowship.html">Graduate
Fellows in Digital Humanities</a>, a program now entering its fifth year at
UVa Library.

The Praxis Program will fund six University of Virginia graduate students from
a variety of disciplines to apprentice with us for an academic year as we
design and build <em>Prism,</em> a new tool for "crowd-sourced" textual
analysis, visualization, and humanities interpretation.

But <em>Prism</em> is not the goal.

Recognizing that up-to-date methodological training is often absent or
catch-as-catch-can for humanities graduate students, we are using the pilot
year of the Praxis Program to experiment with an action-oriented curriculum
<em>live and in public.</em> We hope to attract partners in labs and centers
at other institutions as well as local supporters, and to situate our
contribution in a larger conversation about the changing demands of the
humanities in a digital age.

The Praxis Program will better equip knowledge workers for emerging faculty
positions and <a
href="http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/alt-ac">alternative academic
careers</a> at a moment in which new questions can be asked and new systems
built. We'll share our <a href="http://praxis.scholarslab.org">evolving
curriculum</a> and our staff and students alike will be <a
href="http://www.scholarslab.org/category/praxisprogram/">blogging about their
experience</a>.

We invite you to watch us this year, as we see what it takes to produce
thoughtful DH scholars who are comfortable designing effective user
experiences, writing and working with open source code, engaging broad
audiences, managing teams and budgets, and theorizing their work within the
rich tradition of humanities computing.

Contact:

<a href="http://nowviskie.org">Bethany Nowviskie</a> Director, Digital
Research & Scholarship University of Virginia Library <a
href="mailto:bethany@virginia.edu">bethany@virginia.edu</a>




